
*Migrated from Wordpress*

The following is a response to a comment made by Scott Aaronson, who in an effort to clarify how quantum mechanics or quantum computing could have any bearing on the question of free will, posits that creating a simulation of the mind that could predict a person’s thoughts and actions might require simulation down to the molecular level, and hence need to take into account quantum effects; he then remarks that this could account for free will.

My own position is that this approach is entirely wrong; “free will” can and should be explained entirely within the confines of a deterministic universe, and brains are more likely to operate at a classical scale, and that the challenge is much larger than brain simulation, simply because we are “entangled” with our environments.

---

Any predictive machine, to do its job, will have to mimic the exact sensory inputs experienced by the brain, from the moment it has been scanned, which seems just as unlikely as an exact copy. This includes the entire environment that could possibly interact with the brain, which is the light-cone from the moment of scanning, which could include many other interacting brains.

In my mind, this is a challenge of greater significance. It is questionable that one would be interested in molecular-level simulations of the brain, due to the fact that it is distributed and robust to noise, although it would be interesting to investigate if a brain is indeed a “chaotic” system in a traditional sense, or if it is a “metastable”, sensitive to certain types of information and robust to noise. Experience and common sense tells us it is the latter, wherein it becomes a matter of identifying and controlling for the most significant effects.

Though it is certainly an interesting fantasy to imagine that the effects of a single quantum state, say in a calcium ion passing through an ion channel, could cascade down into a different decision which goes on to lead to a different life. In this case, it would seem that quantum indeterminacy causes a lack of free will, rather than creates it!

With regards to the question of where free will arises from, even if we assume our brains operate deterministically according to human nature, we would have a “choice” and a “will” by being programs which integrate certain values and beliefs through a complex interaction of our preexisting self and new information and experiences. That decision-making is a search through our experiences to achieve consistency between action and values, by estimating the value of likely futures, utilising the material of the past, seems to agree with experience, and basic models of the brain. Choice, then, including choosing to choose, is the affirmation of certain reasons over others. Which is why it is difficult to change someone else’s mind, except by providing good reasons. On the other hand some reasons are less “reasonable” than others, and take the form of impulses and influences, since after all we are not simply rational programs, and are rather driven by competing schemas which have different priorities. In essence, this is an argument that there is nothing to “explain” about free will, which is a concept that masks complex psychological and decision making processes.

And that can be explained entirely within a deterministic framework. What is less “deterministic” is the fact that we do not always have constant or near constant state and our interactions with the world are complex. That we have to estimate our state constantly and give a description to ourselves or someone else is simply a result of a deterministic human condition operating on constantly changing mental content.